# Creating a Next.js Project

To create a Next.js application, open up the terminal and run the following command:

```bash
npx create-next-app <app-name>
```

This creates a boiler application to make it easy to get started

# Pages

In Next.js, a page is a React Component that is exported from the `'pages'` directory. Pages are associated with a route based on their file name.

- `"pages/index.js"` is associated with the route `"/"`
- `"pages/posts/first-post.js"` is associated with the route `"/posts/first-post"`

To create a new page, simply create a new file with the name of the route you want it routed to, then export a component.

```JSX
// my-page.js
export default function MyPage() {
  return(
    <h1>This is My Page</h1>
  )
}
```

The above creates a new route to `/my-page`.

As far as I can tell, ES6 arrow functions don't work. You have to use the keyword `funciton`. The function can have any name, but it must be exported as a `default` export.

## Linking Between Pages

In Next.js, we use the `Link` component (type: `next/link`) to navigate between pages in our application on the client's side. `Link` also accepts props that give you better control over the navigation behavio. It must be imported to use it.

```JSX
import Link from "next/link"
            
<h1>
    Read <Link href="/my-page">this page!</Link>
</h1>
```

==***Note: when returning a JSX object, you can wrap it in empty angle brackets (`<>...</>`) instead of `<div>...</div>`.***==

Client-side navigation is pretty fast in Next.js since the navigation happens via JavaScript instead of by the browser. So, a new page is not loaded, just a new view of the app is displayed. You could still use `<a>...</a>` to navigate within the app, but the entire page will refresh, meaning a longer response time for the client.

The App automatically splits, meaning each page only loads what's necessary for that page, so the entire app is not loaded if you only load the homepage view. This ensures a quick load for the homepage, even if you have 100s of pages. Also, if one page throws an error, the other pages work just fine.

In production, Next.js looks for `Link` components in the viewport and prefetches the code for the linked page in the background.

==***Note: do not use a `Link` component when linking to an external page. Use anchor elements***==

==***Note: if you need to use other attributes like `className`, you have to add it to an anchor tag like this:***==

```JSX
<Link href="/">
    <a className="myLink">
    My Link
  </a>
</Link>
```

