# Deploying with Vercel

The easiest way to deploy a Next.js app is to use the [Vercel](https://vercel.com/) platform, which was developed by the creators of NextJS. It's a serveless platform for static and hybrid applications, and it's free!

Once you've signed up, you can import your project from GitHub by going to [https://vercel.com/import/git](https://vercel.com/import/git).

Once you pick your settings and deploy the repository, the application will start building. Once done, you'll recieve your deployment URLs, where you can see your live site.

Since Vercel and NextJS are developed by the same people, there some great features that happen by default. Pages that use Static Generation and assets are automatically served from the Vercel Edge Network and pages that use Server-Side Rendering and API routes will automatically become isolated Serverless Functions. This allows page rendering and API requests to scale infinitely.

Vercel also allows custom domains, environment variables, and does automatic HTTPS.

# Preview Deployment for Every Push

When you create a new branch, make some changes, and create a new pull request, you'll se a comment by the vercel bot on the pull request page. It will provide a preview URL so that you can see the changes you just made.

Each branch automatically gets a preview with every push. The URL always points to the latest preview. And that creates your workflow. DPS, **D**evelop, **P**review, and **S**hip.

It is strongly recommended that this is the workflow you use when developing Next.js applications.

# Other Hosting Options

Any hosting provided that supports Node.js can host your Next.js application. Just run `npm run build` to build your application, then use `npm run start` to start your Node.js server.