- [Array Type Notation](#array-type-notation)
- [Tuples](#tuples)
- [Rest Parameters](#rest-parameters)
- [Spread Syntax](#spread-syntax)

Typing arrays is a bit different than working with primitive types because arrays contain a variety of information. The data type of each element needs tracking, so TypeScript makes this easy

# Array Type Notation

To use TypeScript type annotation for arrays, decalre the variable, declare the variable type, then put square brackers (`[]`) after the type.
	
```js
let names: string[] = ['Aaron', 'Harmony'];
```
	
An alternative to this is to use `Array<T>` where `T` is the type.
	
```js
let names: Array<string> = ['Aaron', 'Harmony'];
```
	
To annotate for multidimensional arrays, we use square brackets multiple times
	
```js
let arr: string[][] = [[]]; // 2D array
let arr: string[][][] = [[[]]]; //3D array
```
	
# Tuples

Tuples are arrays with a fixed sequence and we can annotate exactly what each index type should be.
	
```js
let tuple: [string, number, string, boolean] = ['Is', 7, 'our favorite number?', false];
```
	
Including more or less elements than defined would cause an error. Including elements that don't match the type at each index would cause an error as well. You can also set the types to initial values, and TypeScript will infer the types for each index

# Rest Parameters

We can assign types to rest parameters as well. Rest parameters are parameters that take an unknown number of values
		
```js
function smush(firstString: string, …otherStrings: string[]) {
	// rest of the function
}
```
	
# Spread Syntax

TypeScript's tuples pair really well with JavaScript's spread syntax. This is especially useful for functions that use lots of arguments:

```js
function gpsNavigate(startLatitudeDegrees:number, startLatitudeMinutes:number, startNorthOrSouth:string, startLongitudeDegrees: number, startLongitudeMinutes: number, startEastOrWest:string, endLatitudeDegrees:number, endLatitudeMinutes:number , endNorthOrSouth:string, endLongitudeDegrees: number, endLongitudeMinutes: number,  endEastOrWest:string) {
	/* navigation subroutine here */
}
```
	
This is exhausting to even look at. This function calls for 2 sets of coordinates, but it's too awkward to read. Instead we can use tuple variables that represent the starting and ending coordinates:
		
```js
let codecademyCoordinates: [number, number, string, number, number, string] = [40, 43.2, 'N', 73, 59.8, 'W'];
let bermudaTCoordinates: [number, number, string, number, number, string] = [25, 0 , 'N' , 71, 0, 'W'];
```

These tuple type annotations guarantee that the types of the elements will be valid function parameters for `gpsNavigate()`. Now we can use JS spread syntax to write a much more readable function call
		
```js
gpsNavigate(...codecademyCoordinates, ...bermudaTCoordinates);
```