When declaring a function in JS, we often expect it to be invoked with arguments of a certain type, but JS is so flexible that it allows functions to be invoked with unexpected argument types. Even if that doesn't throw errors, it can still cause problems.
	
# Parameter Type Annotations

In TypeScript, function parameters can be given type annotation in the same way that variables can
	
```js
function greet(name: string) {
	console.log(`Hello, ${name}!`);
}

greet('Aaron'); // no error
greet(1243); // error, argument must be a string
```
	
If no annotation is provided, it is assumed that the variable is of type `any`.


# Optional Parameters

At times, we want parameters to be optional. To define a parameter as optional we use a question mark.
	
```js
function greet(name?: string) {
	console.log(`Hello, ${name || 'Anonymous'}!`);
}
	
	greet(); // prints 'Hello, Anonymous!'
```
	
# Default Parameters

If a parameter is given a default value, TypeScript will infer the variable type to be the same as the default's type, just like it will infer a variable's type based on the initial value.
	
This is a cleaner way to get the same result as using `?` to mark a parameter as optional:

```js
funtion greet(name = 'Anonymous') {
	console.log(`Hello, ${name}!`);
}
// Can still take a string as a parameter, but defaults to 'Anonymous'
```
	

# Inferring Return Types

TypeScript can infer the types of values return by the function by looking at the types of the values after a funtion's return statements.

```js
function createGreeting(name: string) {
	return `Hello, ${name}!`;
	// infered to return a string since return is followed by a string
}
	
const myGreeting = createGreeting('Aaron');
// infered to be a string since the called function returns a string
```
	

# Explicit Return Types

If we want to be explicit about what type a function returns, we can add an explicit type annotation after the parameters closing parenthesis.
	
```js
function createGreeting(name?: string): string {
	if (name) {
		return `Hello, ${name}!`;
	}
		
	return undefined; // Error, undefined is not a string		
}
```
	
# Void Return Type

Type annotation is incredibly useful. It helps make our code more readable and neat. Because of this, it's preferred to use type annotation even when the function doesn't retrun anything.○ We can use the `void` type to show that the function doesn't return anything.
	
```js
function logGreeting(name:string): void {
	consolo.log(`Hello, ${name}!`);
}
```
	
# Documenting Functions

TypeScript recognizes regulat JavaScript comment syntax (`//` and `/* */`), but TypeScript also has a thrid type: a documentation comment. It starts with `/**` and ends with `*/` with `*` for each line within the comment
		
```js
/**
	* documentation comment line 1
	* documentation comment line 2
	*/
```
	
A small example of how this is used:
		
```js
/**
  * Returns the sum of two numbers.
  *
  * @param x - The first input number
  * @param y - The second input number
  * @returns The sum of `x` and `y`
  *
  */
	
function getSum(x: number, y: number): number {
  return x + y;
}
```
