- [Enums](#enums)
- [String Enums vs. Numeric Enums](#string-enums-vs-numeric-enums)
- [Object Types](#object-types)
- [Type Aliases](#type-aliases)
- [Function Types](#function-types)
- [Generic Types](#generic-types)
- [Generic Function](#generic-functions)

The previous pages have covered all the types that are defined for you, Primitives and Arrays. But TypeScript lets us define custom types that can enable type checking for our exact purposes. An example of one custom type we've learned already is the tuple.

Pre-defined types are like ingredients because they can be used on their own, but they can be combined to create custom types. Complex types are usable in the same way that simpler types are and can be used as type annotations.
	
```ts
let myVar: complexType;
```
	
# Enums

Enums are the first and most useful complex types we will learn. We use enums when we'd like to enumerate all the possible values that a variable could have. So far, all other values have been limitless: A `string` can have any value and a `boolean[]` can have any array of booleans.

There are many reasons to define an enum, or a limited number of values a variable can be. For example, an enum that specifies compass directions:
		
```ts
enum Direction {
  North,
  South,
  East,
  West
}
```

From here, we can use the enum as a type declaration and the values it contains as values for the vriable assigned to that type
		
```ts
let whichWay: Direction;
whichWay = Direction.North; // no type error
whichWay = Direction.Northeast // type error, not a valid value
whichWay = West // error, wrong syntax
```
	
Under the hood, TypeScript processes these kinds of enum type to numbers. Enum values are assigned a numerical value according to their listed order, starting at 0. So, `Direction.North == 0`, `Direction.South == 1`, etc.. This means we could do `whichWay = 2` and we would not get an error since `Direction.East == 2`. If we want to, we can change the starting number:
	
```ts
enum Direction {
	North = 7,
  South,
  East,
  West
}
```
	
This makes the Directions equal 7, 8, 9, and 10. You can also specify each number sperately.
	
```ts
enum Direction {
  North = 8,
  South = 2,
  East = 6,
  West = 4
}
```
	
These numbers match up with the keys on the numpad.

# String Enums vs. Numeric Enums

So far, we've created numeric enums (enums that are based on numbers), but we can also create string enums that are based on strings.
	
```ts
enum DirectionNumber { North, South, East, West } // numeric enum
enum DirectionString {
  // string enum
  North = 'NORTH',
  South = 'SOUTH',
	East = 'EAST',
  West = 'WEST'
}
```
	
With string enums, we must write the string explicitly, as shown above. We could use any string to define an enum value, however it's best to use the convention used above. The string value is the capitalized form of the variale name. This way, error messages and logs will be much more informative.

It's recommended to always use string enums because numeric enums can let bugs sneak into the code because assigning arbitarty numbers, like `693458`, will not cause type errors when using numeric enums

String enums are much more strict because you must assign enum types to enum values. You cannot even assign a string that matches an enum value, it must be the enum value exactly.

# Object Types

With TypeScript objects, we are allowed an extremely fine level of control over variable types in our programs and they're also the most common custom type.
		
```ts
let aPerson: {name: string, age: number};
aPerson = {name: 'Timmy', age: '7'}; // type error: age must be a number
```
	
This can be useful for defining exactly what needs to be in an object when an object is passed as an argument in a funciton.

```ts
function sayHappyBirthdayWithObject(personObject: {name: string, age: number, giftWish: string, success: boolean}){
  let output ='';
  output += 'Happy Birthday ' + personObject.name + '! ';
  output += 'You are now ' + personObject.age + ' years old! ';
  output += 'Your birthday wish was to receive ' 
         + personObject.giftWish + '. And guess what? You will ';
  if (!personObject.success){ output += 'not '; }
  output += 'receive it! \n';
  console.log(output);
}
```

TypeScript places no restriction on the types of an object's properties. They can be enums, arrays, and even other object types.
	
# Type Aliases

A great way to customize types in out program is to use type aliases. These allow us to define alternative type names for convenience. Their formati is `type <alias> = <type>`
	
```ts
type MyString = string;
let myVar: MyString = 'Hi'; // valid code
```
	
Obvisouly, this isn't super useful for strings, but it is very useful when referring to complicated types that need repeating, auch as object types of tuple types
	
```ts
type Person = { name: string, age: number };
let aCompany: {
  companyName: string,
  boss: Person
  employees: Person[],
  employeeOfTheMonth: Person,
  moneyEarned: number
}
```
	
TypeScript aliases are nothing more than names. They have absolutely no influence over how types work

# Function Types

A neat thing about JS is that we can assign functions to variables
	
```ts
let myFavFunction = console.log;
myFavoriteFuction('Hello World'); // Prints 'Hello World'
```
	
A neat thing about TypeSript is that we can control exactly whatkinds of functions are assignable to a variable via function types. Function types specify the argument types and return types of a function.
	
```ts
type StringsToNumberFunction = (arg0: string, arg1: string) => number;
```
	
The syntax is just like arrow notation except we do the return type instead of the return value. Since this is just a type, we don't write the body of the function at all
	
```ts
let myFunc: StringsToNumberFunction;
myFunc = function(firstName: string, lastName: string) {
  return firstName.length + lastName.length;
};
	 
myFunc = function(whatever: string, blah: string) {
  return whatever.length - blah.length;
};
// Neither of these assignments results in a type error.
```
	
As you can see it doesn't matter what the names of the parameters are as long as the type remains correct. Never omit a paramter name or the parentheses when defining a function type, otherwise the code will not run.
		
```ts
// No argument name. Will not run
type StringToNumberFunction = (string) => number; 
 // No parentheses. Will  not run
type StringToNumberFunction = arg: string => number;
```
	
***NOTE: Function types are most useful when applied to callback functions***

# Generic Types

Generics are a great way to create collections of types that share certain formal similarities. These collections are parametrized by one or more type variables. An example of a generic type we've seen before is `Array<T>`. This is generic because we can substitute any type in place of `T`, either pre-defined or custom. We can build our own generics, too:
	
```ts
type Family<T> = {
  parents: [T, T], mate: T, children: T[]
};
```
	
When implementing this via type annotation, we replace `T` with the data type of our choosing.
	
```ts
let aStringFamily: Family<string> = {
	parents: ['stern string', 'nice string'],
  mate: 'string next door', 
  children: ['stringy', 'stringo', 'stringina', 'stringolio']
};
``` 
	
It's convention to use `T` within the type annotation as a type placeholder. Later, when the genric type is used, `T` is replaced with the provided type.
	
# Generic Functions

Let's say we wanted to create a function that returns arrays filled with a certain value. In JavaScript, it would look like this:
	
```ts
const getFilledArray = (value, n) => Array(n).fill(value);
```

This works just fine, but there is a problem when you try to define the function's return type. We know it should be an array of whatever value's type is. This is where generic functions come in handy.
	
```ts
const getFilledArray<T> = (value: T, n: number): T[] => Array(n).fill(value);
```
	
Here, we tell TypeScript to make sure that value and the returned array have the same type `T`. When the function is invoked, we provide `T`'s value:
	
```ts
getFilledArray<string>('cheese', 3);
// returns ['cheese', 'cheese', 'cheese']
```
	
Now the function is correctly typed and less prone to errors.