# SASS General Sytax

SASS allows us to create variables to store data similar to JavaScript. SASS variables start with a $ followed by the variables name

```SCSS
$main-fonts: Arial, sans-serif;
$headings-color: green;
```

SASS also allows us to nest rules, allowing us to better organize our stylesheet
	
```SCSS
nav {
	background-color: red;

	ul {
		list-style: none;

		li {
			display: inline-block;
		}
	}
}
```
		
# Mixins

A mixin is a group of CSS declarations that can be reused throughout the style sheet. Newer CSS features take time before they are fully adopted and ready to use in all browsers. As features are added to browsers, CSS rules using them may need vendor prefixes.

Consider box-shadow:
	
```CSS
div {
	-webkit-box-shadow: 0px 0px 4px #fff;
	-moz-box-shadow: 0px 0px 4px #fff;
	-ms-box-shadow: 0px 0px 4px #fff;
	box-shadow: 0px 0px 4px #fff;
}
```
		
That's a lot of re-writing! especially if we end up needing to change the box-shadow rule, or add it to multiple elements. Instead we can use mixins which work like functions. They are declared with the `@mixin` directive
		
```scss
@mixin box-shadow($x, $y, $blur, $c){
	-webkit-box-shadow: $x $y $blur $c;
	-moz-box-shadow: $x $y $blur $c;
	-ms-box-shadow: $x $y $blur $c;
	box-shadow: $x $y $blur $c;
}
```
			
Once declared, we use it with the `@include` directive
		
```scss
div {
	@include box-shadow(0px, 0px, 4px, #fff);
}
```
		
# Logic Statements

We can use the @if and @else directives to create logic statements just like in JavaScript
		
```scss
@mixin text-effect($val) {
	@if $val == danger{
		color: red;
	} @else if $val == alert {
		color: yellow;
	} @else if $val == success {
		color: green;
	} @else {
		color: black;
	}
}
```
		
# Loops

We can use the @for directive to add styles in a lopp, similar to JavaScript. It's used in two ways

1. start through end
2. start to end

The first excludes the end number, the second includes it.
		
```scss
@for $i from 1 through 12 {
	.col-#{i} { width: 100%/12 * $i; }
}
```
		
This creates 12 class options for grid layout, `.col-1` through `.col-12`. We can use the `@each` directive to map over items in a list or a map

For lists:
		
```scss
@each $color in blue, red, green {
	.#{$color}-text {color: $color;}
}
```
		
For maps
		
```scss
$colors: (color1: blue, color2: red, color3: green);
		
@each $key, $color in $colors {
	.#{$color}-text {color: $color;}
}
```
		
We can create while loops by using the `@while` directive
		
```scss
$x: 1;
@while $x < 13 {
	.col-#{$x} { width: 100%/12 * $x; }
	$x: $x + 1;
}
```

This creates the same classes as our `@for` loop from the top of this section
		
# Partials

Partials in SASS are separate files that hold segments of CSS code. These are imported and used in other SASS files. This allows us to group similar code into a module and keep it organized. Names for partials start with an underscore (`_`), which tells SASS that it's a small segment of CSS and not to convert it into a CSS file.

Also, SASS files end with the `.scss` file extension. To bring code from a partial into another SASS file, use the `@import` directive

For a file named `"_mixins.scss"`:
		
```scss
@import 'mixins'
```
		
# Extend Properties

We can extend features of one element to anther element with the `@extend` directive
		
```scss
.panel{
	background-color: red;
	height: 70px;
	border: 2px solid green;
}
	
.big-panel{
	@extend .panel;
	width: 150px;
	font-size: 2em;
}
```
