# How Java Works

Java is a Compiling Language
	• Java is a compiled language
		○ We write in a code that is easy for humans to understand, creating a .java file
		○ This code gets converted into byte code which is easy for the machine to understand, creating a .class file
		○ The byte code is then run by the machine
	• The Java compiler catches mistakes before the code is fully run
		○ This way, you can get an error stating the exact problem
	
	• To compile and run your code, open up the terminal
		○ Navigate to the directory your file is located in.
			cd C:\<File Path>
			cd C:\users\ruthe\OneDrive\Documents\Java Programming
		○ Then compile your .java file
			javac FileName.java
		○ If your code works, this will generate a .class file that you can run
			java FileName
		○ If the javac command says it's unrecognizable, you'll need to set the path to the JDK (Java Development Kit)
			Set path=C:\Program Files\Java\<file version>\bin
		○ After running this command, you should be able to use the javac command

# Java Console Commands

	• The java command
		○ Runs Java programs (.class files) from the command line

		java <file name> [options]
		
		option	description
		-? or -help	Lists standard options
		-cp <search path>	Lists directories, JAR, or Zip archives used to search for class files
		-client	Runs the client virtual machine
		-D name=value	Sets a system property
		-dsa	disables system assertions
		-ea class or packages	Enables assertions for the specific classes or packages
		-ea	Enables the assert command
		-esa	Enables system assertions
		-server	Runs the server virtual machine, which is optimized for server systems
		-showversion	Displays the JRE version number and then continues
		-verbose	Enables verbose output, which displays a more comprehensive messages
		-version	Displays the JRE version number, then stops
		-X	Lists nonstandard options
		
	• The javac command
		○ Compiles a Java programs (.java files)
		
		javac <filename> [options]
		
		○ You can list multiple files to compile multiple at once
		○ You can also use an asterisk (*) in place of the file name to compile all the java files in the folder at once
		
		Option	Description
		-bootclasspath <path>	Overrides locations of bootstrap class files. (Boot strap files are the classes that implement the Java runtime. You will rarely use this option.)
		-cp <path>	Specifies where to find the user class files. Use this option if your program makes use of class files that you've stored in a separate folder
		-d <directory>	Specifies where to places the generated class files
		-deprecation	Outputs source locations where deprecated APIs are used. Use this option if you want the compiler to warn you whenever you use API methods that have been deprecated.
		-encoding <encoding>	Specifies character encoding used by source files
		-endorseddirs <dirs>	Overrides locations of endorsed standards path
		extdirs <dirs>	Overrides locations of installed extensions
		-g	generates all debugging info
		-g:{lines, vars, source}	Generates only some debugging info
		-g:none	Generates no debugging info
		-help	Prints a synopsis of standard options
		-J<flag>	passes <flag> directly to the runtime system
		-nowarn	Generates no warnings
		-source <release>	Provides source compatibility with specified release
		-sourcepath <path>	Specifies where to find input source files
		-target <release>	Generates class files for specific virtual machine version
		-verbose	Outputs messages about what the compiler is doing
		-version	Provides version information
		-X	Prints a synopsis of nonstandard options
		
	• The javap command
		○ Called the java "disassembler"
		○ Takes apart class files and tells you what's inside
		
		javap <filename> [options]
		
	• The jar command
		○ Creates a JAR file
			§ A single file that can contain more than one class in a compressed format that the JRE can access quickly
			§ Stands for Java Archive
		○ Normal to distribute finished java applications
		○ Contains a manifest file that contains info about the files in the archive 
			§ Is auto created but you can make your own
		
		jar [options] <jar-file> [manifest-file] <class-files…>
		
		Option	Description
		c	Creates a new jar file
		u	Updates an existing jar file
		x	Extracts from an existing jar file
		t	lists the contents of a jar file
		f	Indicates that the jar file is specified as an argument
		v	Verbose output
		O	Doesn't compress files when it adds them to the archive. This isn't used much
		m	Specifies that the manifest file is provided. It's listed as the next argument following the jar file
		M	Specifies that a manifest file should not be added to the archive. This is rarely used
		
		○ The c, u, x, or t option must be used

# Basic Elements of Java

Class
	• The Class creates the object of the java file
	• The Class must have the same name as the file, otherwise the program will not run.
	• An example of a line of code that creates the class:
	Public class Example {}
		○ The term public has not been explained yet
		○ The term class denotes that this line is establishing the class
		○ The term Example denotes the name of class and must be the same name as the file itself
		○ The {} establish the domain of the class.
			§ The Methods of the program will be held within the domain of the class
Method
	• The method establishes how the code is run
		○ This is me assuming things. Methods haven't fully been explained to me yet
	• Example of a line of code that outlines the method
	Public static void main(String[] args) {}
		○ The term public, static, and void have not been explained yet
		○ The term main() is the type of method. It hasn't been explained further than that.
		○ The term String[] args within the main() method has not been explained yet, but is required for the code to run.
		○ The {} establish the domain of the method.
			§ The Syntax of the program will be inside the domain of the method
Syntax
	• Syntax is the individual lines of code that perform tasks inside your program
	• The only syntax I know so far:
	System.out.println();
		○ The term System is from the core library provided by Java
		○ The term out is short for output
		○ The term println is short for print line. It will begin a new line after it’s Syntax has been performed.
		○ A ; ends the Syntax statement so a new one may begin
	• This line of Syntax tells the system to output a print line that reads whatever is in the () of the println term, then to begin a new line.
		○ If you want it to print plain text, you must put the text in quotes
		println("Hello there!")
	• You can also use the term print() instead of println()
		○ This will print whatever is in the (), but it will not begin a new line afterward.

# Code Breakdown Example

## The Code

Filenamd: `TestFile.java`

```java
1. Public class TestFile {
2.        Public static void main(String[] args) {
3.                 System.out.println("Testing...");
4.                 System.out.println("Testing...");
5.                 
6.                 /*
7.                 Remember that the println syntax will
8.                 start a new line after.
9.                 The syntax print does not start a new
10.                line after
11.                */
12.                
13.                System.out.print("1...");
14.                System.out.print("2...");
15.                System.out.println("3...");
16.                System.out.println(" ");
17.                System.out.println("Did it work??");
18.        }
19. }
```

## Line by Line Breakdown

1. Establishes the class and begins the domain of the class
2. Establishes the method and begins the domain of the method
3. Syntax that tells the system to output a print line that reads "Testing…" then begin a new line
4. Syntax that tells the system to output a print line that reads "Testing…" then begin a new line
5. Whitespace that the computer ignores
6. The begin of a comment that will take up multiple lines
7. Comment that the computer ignores
8. Comment that the computer ignores
9. Comment that the computer ignores
10. Comment that the computer ignores
11. The end of the comment that took up multiple lines
12. Whitespace that the computer ignores
13. Syntax that tells the system to output a print line that reads "1…" but to not begin a new line
14. Syntax that tells the system to output a print line that reads "2…" but to not begin a new line
15. Syntax that tells the system to output a print line that reads "3…" then begin a new line
16. Syntax that tells the system to output a print line that is blank, then begin a new line
17. Syntax that tells the system to output a print line that reads "Did it work??" then begin a new line
18. The end of the method's domain
19. The end of the class' domain