# Sequelize

Sequelize lets us focus on Node.js instead of SQL, and you can find the official docs for it [here](https://sequelize.org). Sequelize is a 3rd party, Object-Relational Mapping Library. It maps SQL into a JS object for easy use with useful methods. It also lets us create data models, instantiate those models to create new data points based on the model, lets us perform queries on models, and creates associations.

To start using it, download it into a project via `npm`

```bash
npm i --save sequelize
```

You'll also need to manual install a driver for whatever database you are using. If your using MySQL, you install `mysql2`. Sequelize uses this driver in the background, so no need to import it anywhere.

# Connecting to a Database

To start using sequelize in a project, we need to connect it to our database. To connect to a database, you have to create an instance of `Sequelize`. You can do this by either passing connection parameters separately or by passing a single connection URI (Uniform Resource Identifier)

```JS
const { Sequelize } = require('sequelize');
        
// Option 1: Passing a connection URI
// Example for sqlite
const sequelize = new Sequelize('sqlite::memory:') const sequelize = new 
// Example for postgres
Sequelize('postgres://user:pass@example.com:5432/dbname') 

// Option 2: Passing parameters separately (sqlite)
const sequelize = new Sequelize({
  dialect: 'sqlite',
  storage: 'path/to/database.sqlite'
});
        
// Option 3: Passing parameters separately (other dialects)
const sequelize = new Sequelize('database', 'username', 'password', {
  host: 'localhost',
  dialect: /* one of 'mysql' | 'postgres' | 'sqlite' | 'mariadb' | 'mssql' | 'db2' | 'snowflake' | 'oracle' */
});
```

There are a lot of options that this constructor accepts. See the [API Reference](https://sequelize.org/api/v6/class/src/sequelize.js~sequelize#instance-constructor-constructor) for documentation. (Option 3 is what we used in the Udemy Course.)

# Testing the Connection

You can use `.authenticate()` to test if the connection is ok

```JS
try {
  await sequelize.authenticate();
  console.log('Connection has been established successfully.');
} catch (error) {
  console.error('Unable to connect to the database:', error);
}
```

# Convention

`Sequelize` (capital S) refers to the library itself while `sequelize` (lowercase s) refers to an instance of `Sequelize` and represents a connection to a database. Most methods in Sequelize return promises, allowing us to the Promise API (`then`, `catch`, `finally`) out of the box.