# MongoDB

MongoDB is a database engine used to run efficient NoSQL databases. The name is based off of the word "humongous" because it is built to store a huge amount of data.

## How it Works

In NoSQL we have collections, whereas SQL has tables, and NoSQL has documents instead of records (as in SQL). There are no schemas that define how our data is stored. Instead, we can have any kind of data in a collection that can have any structure instead of a predefined structure. A document stores data in a JSON format.

```JSON
{
	"name": "Max",
	"age": 29,
	"address":
		{
			"city": "Munich"
		},
	"hobies": [
		{ "name": "Cooking" },
		{ "name": "Sports" }
	]
}
```

Each object is considered a document, so nested objects are considered embedded documents.

In NoSQL, document relationships are created by repeating data through documents, encouraging you to store data in the form you need it without having to combine multiple collections on the server. But, you can still do that.

You can also create references to create relationships between documents.

```JSON
// Customer Document
{
	"userName": "ddnrp53",
	"favBooks": {"book1": "id1", "book2": "id2"}
}

// Books document
{
	"_id": "id1",
	"name": "Lord of the Rings"
}
```

# MongoDB Atlas

Atlas is a cloud database that uses MongoDB at its core. Users deploy clusters, which are a group of servers that store data. It funcitons in replica sets, meaning the data is stored reduntently, that way if one replica fails, the data is still accessible from the other replicas in the set. 

Atlas manages the cluster creation for us, which makes deploying to cloud services much easier.