# Getting Started

- [Instalation](#instalation)
- [Editor Setup](#editor-setup)
- [Optimizing for Production](#optimizing-for-production)
- [Browser Support](#browser-support)

## Instalation

To get started, use `npm` to install the `tailwindcss` package. Then, create a `tailwind.config.js` file. Use the following commands in your project:

```
npm install -d tailwindcss
npx tailwindcss init
```

Next, configure the template paths in the `tailwind.config.js` file.

```js
// tailwind.config.js

/** @type {import('tailwindcss').Config} */
module.exports = {
  content: ["./src/**/*.{html,js}"],
  theme: {
    extend: {},
  },
  plugins: [],
}
```

Next, we add the core Tailwind directives to the main CSS file.

```css
/* src/input.css */
@tailwind base;
@tailwind components;
@tailwind utilities;
```

Finally, use the Tailwind CLI to build our css.

```bash
npx tailsindcss -i ./src/input.css -o ./dist/output.css --watch
```

Now, we can start using Tailwind classes by linking in the CSS file to our HTML.

## Editor Setup

Tailwind uses a lot of custom CSS at-rules, so to prevent your IDE from triggering warnings, make sure you install a plugin that understands Tailwind syntax.

If you're using VS Code, use the official Tailwind CSS IntelliSense plugin. This plugin supports many features, such as autocomplete, linting, hover previews, and syntax highlighting.

You can also setup automatic class sorting using the official Prettier plugin that is maintained by Tailwind CSS. It automatically sorts your classes following Tailwind's recommended class order.

## Optimizing for Production

Tailwind CSS is incredibly perfomant and focuses on produces the smallest CSS file possible by only generating the CSS you *actually use*. For the smallest possible production build, it is recommended to minify your CSS with a tool like cssnano and compressing it with Brotli.

When using the Tailwind CLI, you can minfy your CSS by adding the `--minify` flag.

```
npx tailwindcss -o build.css --minify
```

## Browser Support

Tailwind CSS v3.0 is designed for and tested on the latest stable version of Chrome, Firefox, Edge, and Safari. It does not support any version of IE.

Vendor prefixes are automatically added by Tailwind.