# Core Concepts

- [Utility-First Fundamentals](#utility-first-fundamentals)
- [Hover, Focus, and Other States](#hover-focus-and-other-states)
- [Pseudo-Elements](#pseudo-elements)
- [Media and Feature Queries](#media-and-feature-queries)
- [Attribute Selectors](#attribute-selectors)
- [Advanced Topics](#advanced-topics)

## Utility-First Fundamentals

Tailwind CSS alows us to use pre-existing classes directly in our HTML to create custom CSS designs without writing custom CSS code. With Tailwind, yu wond waste energy inventing class names, your CSS stops growing, and making changes is a lot safer.

With Tailwind, you apply utility class directly to elements instead of assigning them a class name, then styling that class.

Utility classes have some important advantages:

- Designing with constraints. With utilities, you're choosing styles from a predefined **design system**, which makes it much easier to build visually consistent UIs.
- Responsive design. With Tailwind's responsive utilities, we can build fully responsive interfaces, easily.
- Hover, focus, and other states. Tailwind's state variants make it easy to style those states.

## Hover, Focus, and Other States

All utility classes in Tailwind can be applied *conditionally* by adding a modifier to the beginneing of the class name. To apply the `bg-sky-700` class on hover, use `hover:bg-sky-700`.

Tailwind includes a lot of modifiers:

- Pseudo-classes like `:hover`, `:focus`, and `:first-child`
- Pseudo-elements like `::before`, `::after`, `::placeholder`, and `::selection`
- Media and feature queries like responsive breakpoints, dark mode, and `preferce-reduced-motion`
- Attribute selectores like `[dir-"rtl"]` and `[open]`

Modifiers can even be stacked to target more specific situations. For exmaple, changing the background color in dark mode, at the medium breakpoint, on hover:

```html
<button class="dark:md:hover:bg-fuchsia-600 ...">
  Save Changes
</button>
```

### Hover, focues, and active

To use these pseudo-classes, we can simplu use their respective modifiers: `hover`, `focus`, and `active`.

Tailwind also includes modifiers for ther interactive states like `:visitied`, `:focus-within`, `:focus-visible`, and more.

### First, last, odd, and even

We can styles an element when it is the first or last child using `first` and `last` modifiers, and we can style an elements when its an odd or an even child using the `odd` and `even` modifiers. Tailwind also includes modifiers for other structural pseudo-classes like `:only-child`, `:first-of-type`, `:empty`, and more.

### Form states

Form elements can be styled for different states using modifiers like `required`, `invalid`, and `disabled`. This can help reduce the amount of conditional logic in templates by letting the browser apply the right styles for you. There are also modifiers for `:read-only`, `:indeterminate`, `:checked`, and more.

See the [pseudo-class reference](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/hover-focus-and-other-states#disabled) for a complete list of modifiers.

### Styling basd on parent state (`group-{modifier}`)

When you need to style elements based on the state of the parent, give the parent element the `group` class. Then, you can give the children `group-{modifier}` class to style the target element dependant on the state of the parent. This pattern works for every pseudo-class modifier.

### Differentiating nested groups

When nesting groups, you can style elements based on the state of a *specific* parent group by giving that parent a unique group name using a `group/{name}` class, and using that name with group modifier classes with `group-{modifier}/{name}`

Groups can be named however you like and don't need to be configured in any way.

### Styling based on a sibling (`peer-{modifier}`)

You can style elements based on the state of a *sibling* element by marking the sibling with the `peer` class and using `peer-{modifier}` on the target element. This lets you do all sorts of tricks, like floating labels, without any JS.

This pattern works with every pseudo-class modifier. It's important to note that the `peer` marker can only be used on *previous* siblings becaus of how the general sibling combinator works in CSS.

### Differentiating peers

You can differentiate peers the same way you differentiate nested groups, by naming the peers: `peer/{name}`.

Peers can also be named whatever you like and don't need to be configured in any way.

## Pseudo-Elements

### Before and After

Style `::before` and `::after` pseudo-elements using the `before` and `after` modifiers:

```HTML
<label class="block">
  <span class="after:content-['*'] after:ml-0.5 after:text-red-500 block text-sm font-medium text-slate-700">
    Email
  </span>
  <input type="email" name="email" class="mt-1 px-3 py-2 bg-white border shadow-sm border-slate-300 placeholder-slate-400 focus:outline-none focus:border-sky-500 focus:ring-sky-500 block w-full rounded-md sm:text-sm focus:ring-1" placeholder="you@example.com" />
</label>
```

When using these modifiers, Tailwind will automatically add `content: ""` by default. Usually, it's easier to use an actual element such as `<span>` rather than using pseudo-elements. It makes the code easier to read and will generally be less code in the end.

Save `before` and `after` for situations where it's important that the content of the pseudo-element is not actually in the DOM and can't be selected by the user.

### Placeholder text

Style placeholder text of any input or text area by using the `placeholder` modifier.

### File input buttons

You can style buttons in file inputs with the `file` modifier.

Note that Tailwind's borer reset is not applied to file input buttons. This means that in order to add a border to a file input button, you need explicitly set the `border-style` using a class like `file:border-solid`.

### List markers

Style the counters or bullets of lists using the `marker` modifier. The `marker` modifier is designed to be inheritable, so while you can apply it directly on an `<li>` element, you can also use it on a parent to avoid repetitous code.

### Highlighted text

You can set the active text selection style using the `selection` modifier. The `selection` modifier is also inheritable, so you can apply it to one element and all descendant elements will inherit the style.

### First-line and first-letter

You can style the first line in a block using the `first-line` modifier, and the first letter using `first-letter`

### Dialog backdrops

You can style the backdrop of a native `<dialog>` element by using the `backdrop` modifier. If you are using native `<dialog>` elements, look into the `open` modifier for styling the open/closied states.

## Media and Feature Queries

### Responsive breakpoints

To style an element at a specific breakpoint, use responsive modifiers like `md` and `lg`.

Check out the [responsive design documentation](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/responsive-design).

### Prefers color scheme

The `prefers-color-scheme` media query tells you if a user prefers a light or a dark theme, and is usally configured at the operating system level. Utilities with no modifier target light mode and use the `dark` modifier to provide overides for dark mode.

### Prefers reduce motion

The `prefers-reduced-motion` media query tells you if the user has requested that you minimize non-essential motion. Use the `motion-reduce` modifier to conditionally add styles when the user has requested reduced motion.

Tailwind also provides a `motion-safe` modifier that only adds styles when the user has *not* requested reduced motion. This is usefule for when `motion-reduce` would mean undoing a lot of styles.

### Prefers Contrast

The `prefers-contrast` media query tells you if the user has requested more or less contrast. Use `contrast-more` to conditionally add styles when the user has requested more contrast.

### Viewport orientation

Use the `portrait` and `landscape` mdifiers to conditionally add styles when the viewport is ina specific orientation.

### Print styles

Use `print` to conditionally add styles that only apply when the document is being printed.

### Supports rules

Use the `suports-[...]` modifier to style things based on whether a specific feature is supported. So, we coud use `supports-[display:grid]:grid` to only apply a grid style if the users browser supports grid. 

If you're just checking if the property is supported, and not a spcific value, you can just specify the property name: `supports-[backdrop-filter]:bg-black/25`.

## Attribute Selectors

### ARIA states

Use the `aria-*` mdifier to condition style things based on ARIA attributes. By default, the most common boolean ARIA attributes are included in Tailwind.

- aria-checked
- aria-disabled
- aria-expanded
- aria-hidden
- aria-pressed
- aria-readonly
- aria-required
- aria-selected

You can customize which `aria-*` modifiers are available by editing `them.aria` or `theme.extend.aria` in you `tailwind.config.js` file.

To inlcude on-off aria modifiers that you don't want included in your them, or for complex ARIA attributes that take specific values, use square brackets to generate a property on the fly using any arbitrary value.

```HTML
<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th
        aria-sort="ascending"
        class="aria-[sort=ascending]:bg-[url('/img/down-arrow.svg')] aria-[sort=descending]:bg-[url('/img/up-arrow.svg')]"
      >
        Invoice #
      </th>
      <!-- ... -->
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <!-- ... -->
</table>
```

ARIA state modifiers can also target parent and sibling elements using the `group-aria-*` and `peer-aria-*` modifiers.

### Data attributes

Use the `data-*` modifier to conditionally apply styles based on data attributes. Since there are no standard `data-*` attibutes by definition, by default Tailwind only supports arbitrary values out of the box.

```HTML
<div data-size="large" class="data-[size=large]:p-8">
  <!-- ... -->
</div>
```

You can configure shortcuts for common data attribute selectors you're using in your project in the `theme.data` section f your `tailwind.config.js` file.

### Open/closed state

Use the `open` modifier to conditionally set styles when a `<details>` or `<dialog>` element is in an open state.

## Advanced Topics

### Using with your own classes

If you want to use Tailwind's modifiers on your own custom classes, you can! To do so, you need to define the custom class in one of Tailwind's layers or add them using a plugin.

```CSS
@tailwind base;
@tailwind components;
@tailwind utilities;

@layer utilities {
  .content-auto {
    content-visibility: auto;
  }
}
```

From here, we can use Tailwind modifiers:

```HTML
<div class="lg:content-auto">
  <!-- ... -->
</div>
```

### Ordering stacked modifiers

When stacking modifiers together, they are applied inside out, like nested function calls.

```js
// These modifiers:
'dark:group-hover:focus:opacity-100'

// ...are applied like this:
dark(groupHover(focus('opacity-100')))
```

For the most part, the order of the modifier won't matter, but there are a few situations where the order you use actually generates meaningfully different CSS.

```CSS
/* prose-headings:hover:underline */
.prose-headings\:hover\:underline:hover :is(:where(h1, h2, h3, h4, th)) {
  text-decoration: underline;
}

/* hover:prose-headings:underline */
.hover\:prose-headings\:underline :is(:where(h1, h2, h3, h4, th)):hover {
  text-decoration: underline;
}
```

In the first example, every single heading is underlined when you hover over the article itself, whereas in the second example each heading is only underlined when you hover over that heading.