# Applying Styles

All elements can have a `style` attribute where you can set any CSS you want.

```HTML
<h2 style="color: blue;">This is blue!</h2>
```

You can also create a `<style>...</style>` block inside the header of your HTML document, to separate all your CSS from your actual markup. To target specific items, type in a tag (`p`, `h1`, etc.) then create opening and closing curly braces (`{...}`). Inside the curly braces, you can define any CSS rules, and they will be applied to the target. When targeting a tag, the CSS will effect all elements of that type.

You can also target specific elements by using their `id` or `class`. To target an id, append it with a `#`. To target a `class`, append a `.` to it. The `class` attribute can be set on any HTML element, and you can even give an element multiple classes by separating the class names with a space. You can also reuse the same class across multiple elements

CSS rules are ended with a semi-colon (`;`).

```HTML
<style>
    h2 {
        color: blue;
    }
    #red-p {
        color: red
    }
    .green {
        color: green;
    }
    .big {
        font-size: 42px;
    }
</style>

...

<h2>I'm blue!</h2>
<p id="red-p">I'm red!</p>
<p class="green big">I'm big and green!</p>
<p class="green">I'm only green!</p>
```

# Basic Styles

## Color

We can change the text color of any item by defining it's `color`. The value can be set to a word CSS recognizes (`red`, `blue`, `black`, etc), a hexadecimal value (`#AB3344`), HSL(`hsl(25 100% 50%)`), or an RGB value (`rgb(105, 228, 55)`).

Hexadecimal values are six digits long, and each digit can be 0-F (0-9 then A, B, C, D, E, F). The first two digits specify the amount of red in the color, the second two specify the amount of green, and the last two specify the amount of blue.

You can shorten hexadecimal colors to 3 digits, the first representing red, the second green, and the third blue.

HSL colors are defined by their **H**ue, **S**aturation, and **L**ightness. Hue is a number 0 to 360 that determines the actual color (think of it like picking a degree from a color wheel). Saturation is the amount of grey in the color and is a percentage from 0% (solid grey) to 100% (no grey at all). Saturation is the amount of light in the color and rages from 0% (pitch black) to 100% (pure white). Setting lightness to 50% gives no black or white, just the pure Hue.

Specifying an RGB value works on a similar principle. The values range from 0-255 (no letters) and each number determines how much of Red, Green, and Blue make up the color.

```
/* All of these are the same color */
red
#FF0000
#F0F
rgb(255, 0, 0)
hsl(0, 100%, 50%)
```

We can set colors to the many properties of elements:

- Set text color with `color`
- Set background color with `background-color`
- Set border colors with `border-color`

### Liner Gradients

Any time you set a color, you can use a `linear-gradient` instead of a solid color. Linear gradients are where you start at one color, and transition to another. And there are many ways you can define a linear gradient:

```CSS
/* A gradient tilted 45 degrees,
   starting blue and finishing red */
linear-gradient(45deg, blue, red);

/* A gradient going from the bottom right to the top left corner,
   starting blue and finishing red */
linear-gradient(to left top, blue, red);

/* Color stop: A gradient going from the bottom to top,
   starting blue, turning green at 40% of its length,
   and finishing red */
linear-gradient(0deg, blue, green 40%, red);

/* Color hint: A gradient going from the left to right,
   starting red, getting to the midpoint color
   10% of the way across the length of the gradient,
   taking the rest of the 90% of the length to change to blue */
linear-gradient(.25turn, red 10%, blue);

/* Multi-position color stop: A gradient tilted 45 degrees,
   with a red bottom-left half and a blue top-right half,
   with a hard line where the gradient changes from red to blue */
linear-gradient(45deg, red 0 50%, blue 50% 100%);
```
		
Read more about linear gradients [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/gradient/linear-gradient)

## Font

### Font Type

We can change the font in many ways, from how it looks to how big it is. We change what type of font we use via the `font-family` key.

```CSS
p {
    font-family: sans-serif;
}
```

In addition to common fonts that are found on most operating system, you can specify non-standard and custom fonts. One way to do this is to import from the [Google Fonts library](https://fonts.google.com), a free library of fonts provided by google. To link these fonts into our HTML document, we can use a `<link>` tag in the header.

The Google Fonts library allows you to browse fonts, then generates a `<link>` element to import the font into your document. Form there, you can also generate an `@import` statement that can be put into a stylesheet, which is a separate document that holds all of your CSS and can then be imported into your HTML document.

```HTML
<link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Lobster" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css">
```

This is an import statement that allows us to use the Lobster font throughout our HTML document. Now, we could use this font by using the following code:

```CSS
font-family: FAMILY_NAME, GENERIC_NAME;
```

The `FAMILY_NAME` is the custom font and the `GENERIC_NAME` (which is optional) is the font to be used incase the family name font is not available. Family names are case-sensitive and need to be wrapped in quotes if there is a space in the name

You can also specify font size with the `font-size` rule. Any measurement type is accepted (`px`, `rem`, `em`, etc). Read more about measurement units and values [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/Values_and_units).

### Alignment and Size

We can align our text to either left, right, center, or justify (left by default) with `text-align`. We can also set the size of our fint with `font-size`.

```CSS
p {
	text-align: justfy;
	font-size: 18px;
}
```

### Text Transform
You can use the` text-transform` property to change text case. It can accept one of the following value:
- `lowercase` => "look here"
- `uppercase` => "LOOK HERE"
- `capitalize` => "Look Here"
- `initial` => "Look here"
- `inherit` => use the text-transfrom of the parent
- `none` => default/original text

```CSS
.transform {
	text-transform: uppercase;
}
```
		
### Font Weight and Line Height
The `font-weight` property sets how thick or thin character of text are. When importing custom fonts, you'll import the font weights you want as well. The value ranges from about 200 to 800 at intervals of 100.
		
```CSS
.thicc-text {
	font-weight: 600;
}
```
	
Use the `line-height` property to set how much each line of text gets of verticle space.

```CSS
.item {
	line-height: 25px;
}
```
	
## Sizing and Borders

You can specify an elements `width` and `height` by using CSS. If an image has set dimensions, like an image, we can set either `width` or `height`, and the image will scale down to fit the specified dimension. If, for some reason, the mage just warps instead of scaling, you should be able to set the other dimension to `auto` to fix the problem.

```HTML
<style>
    .larger-image {
        width: 500px;
        height: auto;
    }
</style>
```

All elements have borders and you can use CSS to make the borders visible and edit their properties. Borders have 3 properties: `width`, `style`, and `color`. You can specify them all at once, or one at a time.

```HTML
<style>
    .border {
        /* All at once - border: width, style, color */
        border: 1px solid red;
        /* One at a time */
        border-width: 1px;
        border-style: solid;
        border-color: red;
    }
</style>
```

You can also define a border radius to create rounded borders.

```HTML
<style>
    .round-corners {
        border-radius: 10px;
    }
</style>
```

## Spacing

There are three important variables that control the spacing of your elements.

1.  Padding
2.  Border
3.  Margin

Margin is the space outside and between elements. Border is the thickness of the edge of an element. Padding is the space between the elements border and its inner content. Each of them can be set, and they can be set by specific side.

To set all four sides at once:

```CSS
.box {
    padding: 10px;
    border-width: 2px;
    margin: 10px;
}
```

To set each side independently, we can use the above, but add the side we want to affect.

```CSS
.margins {
    margin-top: 10px;
    margin-bottom: 10px
}
```

You can also specify all four sides in one line by either giving the measurements in order of top, right, bottom, and left, or by specifying two measurements, the first defining the top *and* bottom, the second defining the left *and* right.

```CSS
.border {
    /* top, right, bottom, left */
    margin: 10px 5px 7px 20px;

    /* top and bottom, left and right */
    margin: 30px 10px;
}
```

## Opacity

We can set the opacity of item with the `opacity` attibute. It accepts a value between 0 (invisible) and 1 (opaque).

```CSS
.see-through {
	opacity: 0.5;
}
```

You can also set the transparency of an item in the same line we define a color with `rgba(x, y, z, a)`, where `a` is a value 0 (transparent) and 1 (opaque). `x`, `y`, and `z` are still values 0 through 255.

## Box Shadows

We can create shadows around elements to help them pop off the page with `box-shadow`. This style takes 5 value:
1. offset-x
2. offset-y
3. blur-radius
4. spread-radius
5. color

You can aslo chain box shadows together by separating them with commas (`,`) to create some really nice looking shadows.

```css
.shadow {
	box-shadow: 0 10px 20px rgba(0,0,0,0.19), 0 6px 6px rgba(0,0,0,0.23);
}
```

## Positions

Using CSS, we can change the position of an item on the page by setting the `position` type and then changing its `left`, `right`, `bottom`, or `top` properties. There are three main values that `position` can be set to.
1. `relative`
2. `absolute`
3. `fixed`

### `relative`

When set to relative, it will change position based on where it would normally be on the page. The element can then be repositioned *relative* to where it *would* be on the page. You can then change the `left`, `right`, `top` or `bottom` property to determinehow far away it will move from that position. Doing this doesn't affect the normal flow of the elements around it.
		
```CSS
/* Change the element to move up 10px */
.my-element {
	position: relative;
	bottom: 10px;
}
```

### `abosulte`

You can also set an elements position to `absolute`, which locks the element in place relative to its parent container, but only if the parent container is positioned (i.e. the `position` of the parent container is not the default). One nuance here is that with absolute positioning, it will be locked relative to its closest posistioned ancestor. If you don't add a `position` rule (typically `position: relative;`), the browser will keep looking up the chain an ultimately default to the `<body>` tag

Sourrounding items will ignore this element because it is removed from the normal flow of the document, and the offset properties (`top`, `bottom`, `left`, or `right`) are used to adjust the position.

```CSS
.parent-element {
	position: relative;
}

.my-element {
	position: absolute;
	bottom: 10px;
}
```
	
### `fixed`

`fixed` is a type of absolute positioning that locks the element relative to the browser window. It also removes the element from the normal flow of the document. The key difference between `fixed` and `absolute` is that the item won't move when the user scrolls through the page.
		
```CSS
#navbar {
	position: fixed;
	top: 0px;
	left: 0px;
}
```

## `float`

Another positioning tool is `float`. You can set it to either `left` or `right`. It removes the element from the normal flow of the document and pushes it either the left or right of their containing parent element. It's commonly used with the `width` property to specify how much horizontal space the floated element needs.
		
```CSS
#left {
	float: left;
	width: 50%;
}

#right {
	float: right;
	width: 40%;
}
```

## `z-index`

If elements are positioned to overlap (using `absolute`, `relative`, or `fixed` positioning) the latest markup will appear on top by default. To change this, you can use the `z-index` property to specify the order that elements are stacked in.
		
```CSS
/* .first will be on top of .second because 2 > 1 */

.first {
	background-color: red;
	position: absolute;
	z-index: 2;
}

.second {
	background-color: blue;
	position: absolute;
	left: 40px;
	top: 50px;
	z-index: 1;
}
```

# Target by Attribute

You can target elements that have specific attributes with the `target[attribute=value]` syntax. So, we can target all `<input>` elements that are a radio button with the following code:

```CSS
input[type="radio"] {
    color: purple;
}
```

# CSS Inheritance

HTML elements generally inherit styles from their parent elements. So, if I set the `color` of a `<div>` to `green`, then had 5 `<p>` elements inside of it, all the `<p>` elements would be colored green! Spacing styles and borders do not get inherited. Because of this, we can create global styles by applying things like `font-size` and `font-family` to the `<body>` element. All HTML documents have a `<body>` element, even if they are completely blank.

## Overriding Styles

A style set to an element will override the styles set to the parent of that element. Take our previous `<div>` element that made all the text inside of it green. If we set one `<p>` element to be red instead, it would override the rule from its parent and be red. All the other elements would remain green.

Basically, whatever styles are defined last are applied, overriding everything that came before. However, styles that target an `id` attribute always take precedent if styled, and inline styles override everything.

You can make any styling rule override all others by using `!important`. This will make it override, even if it's in the parent element.

```CSS
.importnat-color {
    color: red !important;
}
```

# Variables

You can create custom CSS variables by using two hyphens, a name, then giving it a value.

```CSS
body {
    --penguin-skin: gray;
}
```

To use it, we use the `var()` syntax

```CSS
.penguin {
    background: var(--penguin-skin);
}
```

You can attach a fallback value incase the custom one doesn't work by passing a second argument.

```CSS
.penguin-with-backup {
    background: var(--penguin-skin, black);
    /* Color will be black if custom color doesn't work */
}
```

Variables are inherited from parent selectors, so we can use the `:root` pseudo-class to let our variables be accessible from anywhere. You can over-write the value of a variable in the root class by redeclaring it in a specific element.

```HTML
<style>
    :root {
        -favorite-color: purple;
    }
</style>
```

Older web browsers may not support CSS variables and will therefore default to something else, which isn't good. To help with this, it's good practice to declare a default value, before using a variable

```HTML
<style>
    :root {
        --red-color: red;
    }
    .red-box {
        background: red; /* default value in case cusom variable can't be used */
        background: var(--red-color); /* Overrides default value if possible */
        height: 200px;
        width:200px;
    }
</style>

...

<div class="red-box"></div>
```

# Hover States
You can alter the hover state of an element by using the pseudo-class `:hover`. When set, anytime the target element(s) is hovered over with the cursor, the styling will take effect. So, if we wanted to make it so that all of our links turned red when we hover over them, we can use this code:

```CSS
a:hover {
	color: red;
}
```

# HTML Styling Tags

We can make our text bold, underlined, italicized, or give it a strike through by using certain HTML elements.

```HTML
<p><strong>I'm thicc</strong></p> <!-- Bold text -->
<p><em>I'm slanted</em></p> <!-- Italicized text -->
<p><u>I'm thicc</u></p> <!-- Underline text -->
<p>I'm <s>not </s>here</p> <!-- Strike through text -->
```

# CSS Animation

Using the `animation` properties and the `@keyframes` rule, we can create animation in CSS. There are 8 animation properties, but the 2 most imprtant are `animaiton-name` and `animation-duration`.

- `animation-name` sets the name of the animation so it can be referenced and manipulated
- `animation-duration` sets how long the animation will last (500ms, 4s, 1min, etc.)

`@keyframes` is used to define what happens during the duration of the animation. You specify events that happen at specific percentages of animation and the computer fills in the transitions.
		
```CSS
.color-changing-box {
	animation-name: colors;
	animation-duration: 5s;
}

@keyframes [colors] {
	0% { color: red; }
	50% { color: blue; }
	100% { color: yellow; }
}
```
		
The above code causes the animation to start at the color red, shift to blue through half the duration, then shift through yellow to the end of the animation.

Another animation useful element is `animation-fill-mode`. This defines the style applied to an element when the animation has finished. If set to `forwards`, the animation will end and stay at whatever state is at 100%  instead of reseting to the state before the animation.

If an animation has a specified position (`fixed` or `relative`), then offset properties (`top`, `right`, `left`, and `bottom`) can be used in animation to create movement.

## Defining How an Animation Plays

You can use `animation-iteration-count` to specify the number of times an animation plays. If set to `infinite`, the animation playes forever.

You can use the `animation-timing-function` property to adjust how quickly the element changes over the duration of the animation. There are a number of predifined keywords that we can use:

- `ease` starts slow, speeds up in the middle, and slows at the end
- `ease-out` is quick to start then slows down
- `ease-in` is slow to start then speeds up
- `linear` applies constant speed throughout the animation

And instead of using keywords, you can use Bezier curves that are made with the `cubic-bezier` function. The shape of the curve we define represents how the animaiton plays out. A Bezier curve lives on a 1x1 coordinate system where the x-axis is the duration of the animation and the y-axis is the change in animation.

The `cubic-bezier` function consists of 4 main poits (`p0`, `p1`, `p2`, `p3`). `p0` and `p3` are set for you and they represent the beginning and end of animation at `0, 0` and `1, 1`. You set `p1` and `p2`.
			
```CSS
.color-changing-box {
	animation-name: colors;
	animation-duration: 5s;
	animation-timing-function: cubic-bezier([0.33], [0.2], [0.66], [0.8]);
}

@keyframes [colors] {
	0% { color: red; }
	50% { color: blue; }
	100% { color: yellow; }
}
```

# `::before` and `::after`

The `::before` and `::after` pseudo-elements are essentially dummy placeholder elements that can be used to create some unique styles. `::before` creates a pseudo-element that is the first child of the selected element and `::after` creates a pseudo-element that is the last child of the selected element.

In the following example, a `::before` pseudo-element is used to add a rectangle to an element with the class `heart`:
		
```CSS
.heart::before {
	content: "";
	background-color: yellow;
	border-radius: 25%;
	position: absolute;
	height: 50px;
	width: 70px;
	top: -50px;
	left: 5px;
}
```
		
For the` ::before` and `::after` pseudo-elements to function properly, they must have a defined `content` property. This property is usually used to add things like a photo or text to the selected element. When the `::before` and `::after` pseudo-elements are used to make shapes, the content property is still required, but it's set to an empty string. 

In the above example, the element with the class of heart has a `::before` pseudo-element that produces a yellow rectangle with `height` and `width` of `50px` and `70px`, respectively. This rectangle has round corners due to its  `border-radius: 25%` and is positioned absolutely at 5px from the left and 50px above the top of the element.

# Further Reading

There is so much you can do with CSS and there are a lot of properties we did not cover here. For more information, read the CSS reference on [MDN Web Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS).