# Accommodating for Different Screens

Screens come in all shapes and sizes, and a good way to accommodate them is through media queries. Media queries are created with the `@media` function. Using this, we pass arguments that, if true, change the style of our markup.

```CSS
@media (max-width: 100px) { [CSS Rules] }
```

This would change the CSS style if the devices width is 100px or less.

You should design web pages with a mobile design approach, meaning you design for mobile screens, then use media queries to create styles for larger screes.There are 5 thresholds to consider:

```CSS
/* Extra small devices (portrait phones, less than 576px)*/
/* No media query for 'xs' since this is the default in Bootstrap*/

/* Small devices (landscape phones, 576px and up) */
@media (min-width: 576px) {...}

/* Medium devices (tablets, 786px and up) */
@media (min-width: 768px) {...}

/* Large devices (desktops, 992px and up) */
@media (min-width: 992px) {...}

/* Extra lare devices (large desktops, 1200px and up) */
@media (min-width: 1200px) {...}
```

# Responsive Images

Making an image responsive means making it change size depending on the size of screen so that it will always fit on the screen. A good way to do this is to set the `max-width` to `100%` and the `height` to `auto`. This ensures that the image is never wider than the container that it's in and that it keeps its original aspect ratio

```CSS
img {
    max-width: 100%;
    height: auto;
}
```

Some screens have significantly higher resolutions than other. To make sure your images don't appear pixelated on these higher resolution screens, you should define the `width` and `height` as only half of the original file size. This allows for screens with a higher pixel density to render the image without pixilation.

# Responsive Text

Another way to accommodate for various screen types is by using responsive typography. This means changing the size of your text depending on the size of the screen by using viewport units. Viewport units are a unit of measurement that depend on the size of the viewport. There are 4 viewport units:

1.  `vw` - viewport width
2.  `vh` - viewport height
3.  `vmin` - viewport minimum (smaller dimension)
4.  `vmax` - viewport maximum (larger dimension)

```CSS
/* Set the width of the body to 30% of the viewport width */
body { width: 30vw; }
```

You can create a fluid font size that scales with your screen by setting a specific size, then adding on a small percentage of the view width:

```CSS
/* This shows aluid font-size.
	Size other things via rem, %, and vw for best responsiveness
	Also, ensure page has no odd whitespace by setting display, padding, and margin */
html {
  font-size: calc(15px + 0.390625vw);
  display: block;
  padding: none;
  margin: none
}
```

***Note: viewport units are dependent on the viewport dimensions. Percentages are dependent on the parent container size.***