# Flex Containers and Container Properties

In order to use flexbox properties, you must first place the property `display: flex;` on an element. This allows us to use other flex properties to build a responsive page. Adding `display: flex;` to an element turns it into a flex container. This make is possible to align any children of that element into rows or columns.

You can do that by adding the `flex-direction` property to the parent item and setting it to either `row` or `column`. You can also do `row-reverse` and `column-reverse`. The default is always `row`.

We can align and space out flex items in specific ways by using the `justify-content` property. Whatever we set it to, it will justify on the main axis. The main axis is either horizontal or vertical depending on if the `flex-direction` is set to `row` or `coumn`, respectively. We can set justify-content to the following:

- `center` \- the most commonly used, centers the content on the main axis.
- `flex-start` algins content at the start of the flex container. For `row` it would push the items to the left, for `column` it would ush items to the top. This is the default justification.
- `flex-end` aligns items to the end of the flex container. It's the opposite of `flex-start`.
- `space-between` aligns items to the center of the main axis with space between the items to expand them across the entire container.
- `space-around` is similar to `space-between`, but the last items aren't locked to the edges. There is a half-space between the edges of the container and the content.
- `space-evenly` distributes space evenly between the flex items with a full space at either end of the flex container.

The `align-items` property is similar to the `justify-content` property, but it aligns to the cross axis, which is perpendicular to the main axis. It can be set to the following:

- `flex-start` aligns items to the start of the flex container, but on the cross axis. For rows, it aligns the items to the top of the container.
- `flex-end` aligns items to the end of the flex container on the cross axis.
- `center` \- aligns items to the center of the cross axis.
- `stretch` \- stretches items to fill the flex container along the cross axis.
- `baseline` \- aligns items to their baseline. Baseline is a text concept, think of it as the line that the letters sit on.

The `flex-wrap` property is used to let items in a flex container wrap into new rows or columns instead of only having one large column or row. You can set it to the following:

- `nowrap` is the default. Does not wrap.
- `wrap` wraps items to multiple lines from top-to-bottom for rows and left-to-wright for columns.
- `wrap-reverse` inverts the wrap direction.

# Flex Item Properties

These properties can be used on items that are children of flex elements.

The `flex-shrink` property shrinks items. It allows an item to shrink if the container is too small. Items shrink if the parent container's width is smaller than the combined width of all the flex items within it. This property takes a number as value. The higher the number, the more it will shrink compared to other items in the container. For example, a `flex-shrink` of `3` will shrink 3 times as much than a `flex-shrink` of `1`.

The `flex-grow` property expands items if the parent container expands. It works on the same principles of `flex-shrink`.

The `flex-basis` property sets the initial size of an item. This property uses units (`px`, `em`, `%,` etc.).

You can set `flex-shrink`, `flex-grow`, and `flex-basis` by using the flex property as shorthand. The default property settings are `flex: 0 1 auto;`.

```CSS
.item {
    /* flex: [flex-grow] [flex-shrink] [flex-basis]; */
    flex: 1 0 10px;
}
```

You can set the `order` property to rearrange items. It simply takes a number for each item and puts them in that order.

The `align-self` property lets you adjust each item's alignment individually instead of all at once. It accepts the same values as `align-items` and will override any value set by the parent `align-items` value.