# Grid Container Properties

You can turn any element into a grid container by setting `display: grid;`.

The `grid-template-columns` property adds columns to your grid. The number of parameters you set represent the number of columns and the value of each parameter sets each columns width.

```CSS
.grid {
    /* create two columns with a width of 60px */
    grid-template-columns: 60px 60px; 
}
```

The `grid-template-rows` property adds rows to your grid and it works on the same principles as `grid-template-columns`.

You can use absolute and relative units like `px` and `em` but you can also use these:

- `fr` sets the column or rows to a fraction of the available space
- `auto` sets the column or rows to automatically size itself according to its content
- `%` adjust the column or row to a percent of the width of the container

The `grid-column-gap` property creates empty space between all of your columns and it accepts 1 argument with a measurement value. The `grid-row-gap` property does the same thing, but for rows. Use `grid-gap` to set both at the same time. The first argument will set the row gap, the second will set the column gap.

# Grid Item Properties

A CSS grid has lines that are the hypothetical lines between each column and row. The `grid-column` property will define how many grid lines an item spans. The `grid-row` property does the same thing, but for rows.

```CSS
.grid-item {
    /* set the item to span from the first verticle line to the third verticle line */
    grid-column: 1 / 3;
}
```

Use `justify-self` to align an item horizontally within its cell. By default it's set to `stretch`, but you can set it to:

- `start` aligns content to the left.
- `center` centers content.
- `end` aligns content to the right.

The `align-self` does the exact same thing, but vertically. Use `justify-items` in the container to justify all items at the same time and use `align-items` in the container to align all items at the same time.

# Styling a Grid

Use `grid-template-areas` on a container to group your cells together into areas.

```CSS
/* creates four areas: header, advert, content, and footer */
.grid {
    grid-template-areas:
        "header header header"
        "advert content content"
        "footer footer footer";
}
```

Every word is a cell and every pair of quotation marks represents a row. After creating grid areas, you can inject content into each one by using `grid-area`.

```CSS
.item1 {
    grid-area: header;
}
```

This inserts the `.item1` class into the `header` area of the grid (entire top row in previous code example). You can use `grid-area` even if you haven't established `grid-template-areas`.

```CSS
.item1 { 
    /* grid-area: [start horizontal line] / [start verticle line] / [end horizontal line] / [end verticle line] */
    grid-area: 3/1/4/4 /* sets it in the footer area we made before */
```

When creating rows and columns, you can use the `repeat` function rather than specifying each column and row individually.

```CSS
.grid {
    /* creates 100 rows that are 50px tall */
    grid-template-rows: repeat( 100, 50px);
}
```

You can also repeat multiple values with the `repeat` function and insert the function amongst other values when defining a grid structure.

```CSS
.grid {
    grid-template-columns: repeat(2, 1fr 50px) 20px;
    /* is the same as */
    grid-template-columns: 1fr 50px 1fr 50px 20px;
}
```

You can set the quantity of rows or columns to `auto-fill`. This means it creates as many rows or columns as it can depending on the size of the container. You can also set it to `auto-fit` which works in much of the same way, but it doesn't add new cells. Instead, it stretches what you have to fill the space after exceeding the combined width of all the items

You can use the `minmax` function to specify how small and large columns and rows can get when the grid is resized

```CSS
.grid {
    /* The first colum is 100px wide, 
    the second is a minimum width of 50px and a maximum width of 200px */
    grid-template-columns: 100px minmax(50px, 200px);
}
```